Kai Rowlands

Root-Finding Algorithm

This repository contains three algorithms for determining the root of a function using techniques from calculus, namely the bisection method, the modified secant method, and the Newton-Raphson Method. To begin compile the code using the following commands for each program: (i) g++ bisection.cpp -o bisection; (ii) g++ newton.cpp -o newton; (iii) g++ secant.cpp -o secant. Once you have done this execute the code using the following commands: (i) ./bisection; (ii) ./newton; (iii) ./secant. Once you have done this each program will run on its own.

Bisection Method: Let f be a continuous function on an interval [a, b]. Suppose we know that f(a) is positive and f(b) is negative. By the Intermediate Value Theorem we know that there exists a c in [a, b] such that f(c) = 0. But how can we determine what the value of c is? We begin by determining the midpoint of an and b, c, using the formula c = (a + b) / 2 then compute the value of f(c). If f(c) = 0, then we are done. Suppose that f(c) is positive, then f(c) becomes the new f(a). (Similarly, if f(c) is negative, then f(c) becomes the new f(b).) Now we compute the midpoint of b and c, d and compute f(d). This process is repeated until f evaluated at the midpoint which we computed is zero.

Newton-Raphson Method: Like in the description of the bisection method let f be a continuous function. However, unlike the bisection method, the Newton-Raphson Method does not use two initial guesses, rather one initial value and uses the derivative of f to find the root of f. The statement of this problem is best to think of geometrically. We first compute f(x_0) for some arbitrary x_0. Next, we compute f'(x_0). This yields a line tangent to the curve of the function. If we extend this line to the x-axis, then the tangent line will intersect the x-axis at a value x_1. We repeat this process until the distance between x_n and f(x_n) is arbitrarily close (or in our case for the algorithm, some fixed tolerance). For a visualization of this process, I encourage you visit the Wikipedia page on this topic, they have a great video which really helped me visualize this.

Modified Secant Method: The Newton-Raphson Method is great, but derivatives are not always so nice. What if the derivative of the function we are working with is difficult (or impossible) to compute? The modified secant method accounts for this. Let f be a continuous function and x_0 be our initial guess. Fix some perturbation value δ and define the modified secant formula by setting h = δf(x_0) / (f(x_0 + δ) - f(x_0)). Then we compute x_0 - h. If this value is equal to zero, then we are done; if not, then x_0 - h becomes our new value for x_0 and repeat the process.

Within the program there is room for personalization. You can change the which function you would like to find the root of in line 11 of each program. Likewise, the tolerance value in program is set to 0.00001, for a better approximation you can make this value smaller. And finally the initial guesses for each program are arbitrary, as such you can change these. However, for bisection.cpp make sure that f(a) and f(b) have opposite signs, otherwise the program will not work as designed.
